Varya Trakht

1. Why is bubbleSort() slower than selectionSort() and insertionSort()?
Please explain your answer (succinctly).

All three algorithms have the same time complexity of O(n²).
However, bubble sort is slower than selection sort and insertion sort because
it performs a greater number of swaps, even if elements are already in
their correct positions, each element passes through the array
multiple times to reach its final position.

2. Why is an optimized insertionSort() faster than selectionSort()?
Please explain your answer (succinctly).

Insertion Sort generally performs better on nearly sorted data, due to fewer swaps and comparisons,
making it more efficient in average scenarios.
It places each element directly into its correct position within the sorted part of array.
Also, Insertion Sort has the best-case time complexity of O(n) when the input array is
already sorted, which is not possible for Selection Sort.
Tends to perform better than Bubble and Selection sorts for small datasets.


3. What property does a custom class need to have for it to be usable in an array with the three sort methods you implemented?
Give a name to the concept and also explain specifically in C++ what would need to be implemented.

The concept of making a custom class usable in an array with the three sorting methods is comparison.
This can be implemented using operator overloading for comparison operators (<, >, ==, etc.),
which allows the sorting algorithm to determine the order of elements.
Also, the operators must be const methods since sorting algorithms do not modify the objects during comparison.
For example:
(bool operator<(const Class& other) const {})

4. Why is std::sort so much faster than any of our implementations? Is it primarily because it is better optimized, or is it something more fundamental?

std::sort is so much faster than any of our implementations because it uses not only one algorithm,
but a combination (insertion sort, quick sort and heap sort), choosing the optimal strategy for each specific situation.
As it uses the above sorting algorithms, its average time complexity turns out to be O(n log n) with
guaranteed O(n log n) worst-case performance.
So, the difference comes from a fundamentally different algorithmic approach rather than just optimizations.